Episode title: The 5 Books I Read in March, Embracing Boredom, and Deep Work vs. YouTube

Chapter 1: Cal_s intro
I'm Cal Newport and this is Deep Questions, episode 188. I'm here in my Deep Work HQ, joined by my much older professor or producer Jesse, who is in a completely different decade of life than I am. I am young and sprightly and in my 30s, Jesse is old and decrepit in his 40s. I don't know how we even communicate with each other Jesse, it's like completely different generations. I find it funny how you always call me Professor on Accident. You're my professor. Here's what type of day by the way for the viewing audience. This is what type of day it's been. If you're not watching the YouTube version of our podcast, I'm holding up two different coffee cups. First one is episode 187 coffee cup and I'm on the episode 188 coffee cup. I'm tired today so I got a power up. Pat tipped the bet go. I don't know how we not figured out some dumb weight or system with the restaurant below us. It could be coffee during the taping and immediately afterward drinks. Completely have those things. Yes, you usually have coaching to do after we record it, but you know, it's going to make you more energetic. That's what we should have that worked out and it's just they know when it's coming. Maybe if we make them our soul sponsor, the deep work HQ happy hour. Exactly. Then the show would get lively. All right. Well, anyways, we got a listener calls episode looking forward to it, but we're also now in April.

Chapter 2: The Books Cal read in March, 2022
which means we can do our tradition of reporting on the books I read the month before. So I want to report on the books I read in March 2022. As long time listeners know, generally my goal is to aim for five books per month and that's what I read in March of 2022. I mix genres, I mix difficulties, I want a variety of different books. So let's go through it. Here are the five books I read in March of 2022 in order of completion. The first was Travels with George. This was written by the popular historian Nathaniel Philbrooke. So Travels with George is a illusion to Steinbeck's Travels with Charlie. So if you're a Steinbeck person, you know, Travels with Charlie, Steinbeck is traveling with his dog, Charlie, well, and travels with George Nathaniel Philbrooke who's written a series of books about the revolutionary era in America went on a travel with his dog. And in particular, the dog was not named George. In this case, George is George Washington and Philbrooke and his wife and his dog trace the post inauguration tour of the newly formed country of America that George Washington went on. So he did a tour all the way through New England and then he later did a tour all the way through the South and Philbrooke retraced the steps of that tour in modern times and then went to these went to the spot and then mix it in like with Steinbeck-esque anecdotes about the journeys and his dog being a pain, etc. So I mean, here's the thing. The book was fine. I think the contemporary, the contemporaneous pieces about the dog I didn't care. I mean it's like who to upper middle age people with a dog and the dog gets dirty and it's hard to find hotels within the stand. Like it wasn't that interesting but the history is great. I'm a big fan of Philbrooke's history. I mean I would have been fine if this book really was just about George Washington's post inaugurational tours and just honed in right on that. I kind of read pretty quickly in the in-between on a big Philbrooke fan. Here's what I like about Philbrooke. I love writers who live in cool places and right full-time and Philbrooke who came to writing late. Well I mean late I'm talking about like Jesse's current decade of life. I'm talking about someone in the fort in their forties, right? Jesse is all of one day being 40. We're talking people who largely we would rightly say have very little productive life left. But somehow at that point, and it's you know it's hard for someone like me in my 30s again to really understand what that's like. But somehow at that point he began writing in his forties and his first book was Heart of the Sea about the ship Essex. So this was the ship that was the model for Movy Dick. So it was a fishing a wailing boat that was rammed and sunk by a whale and and I want a great book and some people survived in a life raft like a boat a wailing boat and they were at sea forever and they ended up on an island. It's all a true story. That's how he like burst onto the scene of doing historical fiction writing. But he lives in that ticket and that's what I think is cool. He lives in that ticket where he's just a writer on this wind swept you know island and I always find that very romantic. But anyways he's a great writer because he's a good he's a good archive guy. And you get a little bit of insight in this book about his methods because in the contemporaneous parts he's often hanging out with librarians, historical society curators and you get a sense into what life is like writing that it's all about finding primary sources going to historical archives, going to libraries, pulling out these books that no one has seen in 75 years to try to piece together the context in which history happens. So I thought that was cool. So there you go. Good book. Guide lives on Nantucket. If you're going to read any Phil Brook start with Heart of the Sea. I also thought Mayflower was very good. Valiant ambition is very good as well. So there are some recommendations for you. All right now we get a little bit weird. Not weird but fantasy. And so we got to be careful here Jesse that I get all the names right. So I don't know exactly what path led me to this. I think because I had heard this book was appropriate for younger audiences. I might have been testing this out for my oldest son but I have never read Ursula K. LaGuin and I read her first earth sea book, a wizard of earth sea. So it's a fantasy book written in the 60s. It has a lot of pressure against towards Harry Potter right. I mean there's a young boy who goes to a school for wizards. But it's much more it's much more psychologically astute and sophisticated. It's not the tale of a boy who's meant to be a hero and has to discover it. It's actually the whole metaphor of the book is that through his pride he unleashes essentially like a demon force in the world that is hunting him and in the end yes to hunt it down. So it's much more literary, much more using language and seeing to try to convey a deeper reality. Not so plot focused or expository is like like a JK Rowling or like a George R. Martin. So actually they could really well well crafted well crafted book in the fancy genre. And I thought it was quite good. You know I saw echoes of it. You certainly see echoes of it. You know to me it wasn't Harry Potter. I was thinking more of Love Grossman in the Magicians which has a similar sort of literary metaphorical darkness where they sort of unleashed this creature from the magical I don't know I forgot the mention or something that literally like kills one of the kids at the break beaks at the at the school for wizards. And so clearly Grossman must have been channeling Ursula K. LaGuene. But it was I liked it. I'm not going to let my son read it. I think it's a little more sophisticated and dark for him. He's reading Harry Potter instead. But you know it was a good change of pace. I did I did and did enjoy it. Lots of good old fashioned wizard names. It's all like these weird crazy dungeons and dragons names. All right copy refill. All right book number three. Let's dig in a different direction. Every good endeavor by Timothy Keller. So Timothy Keller is the pastor of Redeemer Presbyterian Church in Manhattan. And he's a public communicator. Effective public communicator. He's written a bunch of books that have done pretty well. At some point someone sent me a bunch of his books. So I have like a stack of his books. So I pulled this off of the stack. The reason why I read it is I every good endeavor is kind of from a Christian perspective. But it is a biblical perspective on work, the point of work, finding work that's significant to you. And I thought this would be something I should probably I should probably know like I should probably have this club in my bag. Understanding biblical perspectives on work and passion and vocation because obviously I've written about this in the past. I'm doing this work now on the deep life. And so I was like let me let me get the Christian biblical perspective on work. And so that's why I dive into that book. There are some good things in there. I mean it was on the pick and choose. But I mean I think there were some interesting threads of thought that I hadn't come across before. I mean here's the most interesting, here's the headline, like a headline idea that comes out of that book, which probably puts it at odds with a lot of sort of elite discourse around work right now. Is Keller finds like a really strong biblical justification for work as an intrinsic good. This is quite different than I think a lot of the anti-ambition, anti-productivity type philosophy that's going on now, which sees work as mainly like an exploitative activity to be tolerated at best and in a utopian society to be minimized. Keller comes at it basically saying God worked in Genesis and that's a argument for work as important. He also has a reading of Genesis that says the seventh day of rest. So God worked and then he rest is basically a biblical mythological recipe for human satisfaction in which you have the seasonality. You need to work but then you need to not let work be all consumany, the step back and rest and it's in that dance. And that's what God did during the first seven days and that's supposed to be an instruction manual for life and you see what Adam and Eve and like basically Genesis is like a whole manual for work. I mean I think you know Karl Marx's head would explode if he read this because it's you know it's it seems really different than a lot of sort of economic materialistic analyses from today but hey cool it's cool to see I love people taking big like big swing thoughts on things that are drawing from interesting sources. So that was an interesting one. Then I read the abolition of man by C.S. Lewis. It's arguable if this is a book I thought it was a book I got on Kindle it's really a collection of three lectures delivered during the World War II so it's pretty short but let's call it a book and I forgot how I came across this I came across it somewhere. I was like I should just read it and I just bought it and read it you know it took me two days it just sort of read it it's not a long thing and it's interesting. So supposedly this is this book quotation marks collection of speeches is was very influential in the 20th century it's a it's an argument for values basically having rooted values on which you build cultural social systems it's an argument against subjectivism this notion of all value is constructed so it's basically like a preemptive rejection of what 30 years later would emerge in French postmodernism before that even existed. So I'm sure this book is not well appreciated by the modern academy but I think that's what made it interesting to read and it's it's it's jargon free and very approachable but I mean you can basically really crudely summarize the argument I hate to summarize it crudely but he's basically making an argument that we have to be careful of the heartless man and the the the the the heartless man what he means is or no the man not the heartless man that's not the right wording. Now the right wording was the man without chest but what he means by that is heartless. He says without a foundation of values which the heart you so in other words like the values that you have these moral intimations about these moral intuitions that this seems right if you ignore that you're just trying to use your brain to think through ethics and mediate like and control your gut which is like let's go I'm mad let's go kill this person I want that to have your your animal instincts and if you try to just tame that with just your brain let's just come up with what makes sense from scratch let's do let's be like Kant and just try to construct a moral system from scratch he's arguing that's not going to work you have to ground it all in what you feel in your heart to sort of these underlying truths. Lewis is a real obviously a Christian apologist but he writes this book outside of the context of Christianity so he's trying to be religion agnostic I mean it's interesting I mean it's something for sure I'm surprised we don't read it like you in a sort of standard heavily post-modern influenced academic culture be a nice thing to assign to people too it's like and here is like a like a very straightforward standard critique and this is the this is the tension between those the tension between those two things because of course the post-modern view would say there is no underlying value system that you're picking up through your metaphorical heart it's all just constructed it's all just systems that are constructed to support various supremacist and power relations and see as Lewis if he had been alive would probably have an issue with that so I was interesting to read quick to read no jargon very approachable all right final book and I mentioned this last week in last week's episodes I actually drew some insights from this book was John McFeed's the fourth draft so I'll point you towards last week's episodes I think maybe 185 I got in I got in the some details of some things I learned from the book it's great it's a John McFeed book about writing a little bit of memoir a lot of craft very interesting you'll be impressed by McFeed after you read it you'll also be insanely jealous like wait a second you could have spent eight months just thinking about an article and then maybe at some point write it when it all feels right like it feels like a very it feels like a very cool life like I can't be jealous I can't complain I write for the New Yorker they're very generous of giving me flexibility and timing when I need it and so I'm not I'm not complaining saying this awesome and John McFeed's awesome is a cool book so if you're into nonfiction writing you can get in a look inside the mind of a master all right so Jesse those are my five books people like to know what you read give us one book Jesse what's one book you've read recently we should know about I'm almost done with four thousand weeks hold it off your bookshelf actually oh yeah all right well what's your almost done with it review I like it I've been you know thinking about it I think about time a lot anyway but um it's it's good I mean you hear I mentioned all the time yeah Ferris talks about it you talk about it other podcasts talk about it yeah the Berkman's Berkman's great Ferris always forgets his name you know is that what is he called he just always like four thousand weeks and well I messed up the book on Ferris' show so I called it four thousand like 40 thousand days or something so Oliver we're all sorry I don't there's nothing particularly hard to remember about your name or actually a book title that's a number can be difficult once you're like in the four digits that that can be difficult so I'm gonna yeah myself uh give myself a break um but yeah that's a great book blurb by me so you know it's good yep that's how you can tell all right so we got some calls right Jesse we sure do all right what do we got first uh first call he actually speaking of what she came across you in your Ferris interview a couple months ago and as a question about your frameworks

Chapter 3: Cal_s Frameworks
Hi, Cal, this is Mike. I've been listening to your podcast ever since Your interview with Tim Ferris. I've been interested in knowing the origins or the frameworks and how they were built and so Some of them seem to know you're based on my Work with seven habits of highly effective people from the 90s. Thanks Well Mike, it's a good question. Kavi is very influential I would say on my thinking Seven habits of highly effective people by the way has sold and I believe this is the official term all the copies It's like 20 million copies or something. It's a it's a crazily Good selling book and one of my arguments is the reason why that book sold so well is not because it was the first book to talk about productivity or time management Those books have been around in fact. I have in my collection. I went back and tried to find the earliest Business oriented time management book that I could and I actually have I don't know if it's a first edition But it's a 1950s edition of a book that's called I don't know time something Time power something like this, but it's like one of the very first books To introduce the idea that time is something you have to have a strategy for managing So this idea had been around for a while seven habits of highly effective people. This is the 80s I think late 80s. I don't think it's early 90s. I think it's late 80s I could be wrong on that but somewhere around them and it came in and sold all the copies And I think it's because it was not that it was a big time management book but because it was Connecting productivity and time management to values in the life will lived People miss this about Kavi like oh, it's a big seven So it must be like tips You know one of those type of books 19 ways to Maximize your effectiveness right so it's dismissed by people who don't know it well as A tip guide something that got a really good title just like people will dismiss Tim Ferris by being like the four-hour work week It's just like this really catchy name as if like that name alone is gonna sell four million books You know like as if Ferris wasn't touching on something deep and what Kavi gets to in that book and which I think is Mike is pointing out is reflected in my deep-life philosophy is he has one of his key ideas is start with the end in mind He has you figure out What your values are what matters to you in your life and then use that trickle down from that to actually guide How you execute in your life? And if you read first things first which is the follow-up book which elaborates on some of these ideas He gets really specific about like what are the roles in your life? You're a father You're an executive at this company You're a leader at your church or like whatever they were and and for each of these you're trying to figure out What are your values and what are your important and then you work back with from that to make sure that those values are reflected in how you're spending your time I mean this is a lot of Steven Kavi a lot of it is how do you allocate your time to support the things that you care most about so that your life is one that reflects your values That's why that book sold all the copies Because this just landed in the 80s When we are in this weird interstitial period out of the post-war boom Uh just out of the Carter era malaise it was very materialistic This was the era of Wall Street. This was the era of high consumerism and people were adrift And then he came in and said we should care about what you want to do what's important in your life and that should Percolate all the way down to what am I doing today? And so I think that's why that book is effective clearly that influenced me The deep life Oh Is it foundations to that Kavi like perspective start with the end in mind And then use that the work backwards to engine your life of course all the details that matter I'm much more systems oriented. I'm I've sort of merged some Kavi Value-based thinking with some David Allen systems based thinking right like I'm kind of merging those two worlds Um, and then thrown in some neuroscience and psychology to boot So it's I've created my own brew but I do give Kavi a lot of credit so Mike That's a good point you noticed Because I mean that's accurate Um, certainly Kavi played roll All right Before we go to the next question I figure we should probably take a moment to think one or two of the sponsors that allows us to keep talking about these things I have a stack of sponsor reads on the ground That's how you know we're a high class production here Okay, I had thrown them on the ground in a in a fit of anger I threw my sponsor reads on the ground, but I now have them back Well, tell you what's one sponsor I'm not angry about but actually quite excited about and that is workable As we talked about in Mondays episode there are a few things more important And running your company your business then hiring the right people I know this from experience There has been no nothing worse for our company than when I when I hired Jesse It's all been downhill You know why I'm because I didn't use workable This is what happens you end up with an old man 40 plus years old the fourth decade of his life Uh Not a young go-gitter with energy, you know, and that's because I didn't use workable So that's the net I used I put a net in the bookstore Next to business advice books if someone picked up a Steven Covey book it was like a a snare release And then the net caught you that the the first two people that sprung on I ended up accidentally strangling with the net so then But I perfected it by the time it got Jesse no Jesse is not he is a valued part of the team But he would have been even easier to hire if I had had workable Workable makes it easy to hire they do a lot of things to make the process go smoothly So you get your job posting out to all the top job boards with a 200 with just one click But then and this is the key to workable They have all these tools to make what happens next more efficient They have video interview tools you can schedule interviews automatically with tools e-signature tools like all the stuff that's annoying The 100 back and forth emails workable makes Faster so you don't have to waste time on the details you can focus on just finding the right people So you can start hiring today with a risk-free 15-day trial And if you hire during the trial, it won't cost you a thing Just go to workable.com slash podcast to start hiring Speaking of hiring if you are worried About potentially being let's say accidentally strangled in my net at the bookstore You probably need some life insurance But even if you're not worried about that you definitely need life insurance Okay, if someone is relying on you for financial support whether it's a child aging parent or business partner You need life insurance. This is stressful for people because they know it But they're not quite sure how to start. Where do you even go to find life insurance? How do I know how much I should pay? Your answer is policy genius You go to policygenius.com You answer a few questions And in minutes you will get quotes personalized Just to you From multiple different companies so you can compare the prices and get a good price The savings here are non-trivial You could save up to 50% or more on your life insurance by comparing quotes Using policy genius They also have licensed experts to help you to answer your questions to make sure that You are getting unbiased advice from these independent advocates So this has solved your problem You're stressed out about life insurance policygenius.com Your set Independent advice compare quotes Safety 50% takes a few minutes and you're good No extra fees Thousands of five star reviews They don't sell your info They're the people you should use for life insurance So head to policygenius.com To get your free life insurance quotes and see how much you could save All right So I don't know Jesse maybe we should make a Make a note Warning people about being strangled in a net Maybe that's not how we should start our ad reads I'm learning on the fly here but this is my This is my guess We're working on it I didn't actually strangled people in a net and policygenius is great All right, so now what I have is a giant This is giant bio papers We're so old fashioned here So people who are watching the video just see that I am swamped in paper Essentially Everything here is run on paper I guess that's what you'd expect perhaps from Someone like me Digital minimalist But I think we're good All papers been organized Jesse let's do another question What do we have here? Hi this is exciting We have a pro golfer who's a fan of you And he's been time blocking during his work and training sessions But he has a question of whether he should time block outside of that Hi, guys My name is

Chapter 4: Timeblocking beyond work
We call professional golfer. I have started using time blocking after reading your book beat work and I just wanted to ask do I use time blocking only for my work or can I use it for other small things. For example, when I am practicing or training during that time I don't have a problem with focusing on the target hand but otherwise if I am on the way to the shower let's say and I'll just stop pick up the phone and you know start scrolling so that's so do I use time blocking to schedule I can going to show from this time to this time that I'm going to like work out from this time to this time I hope that's good all right the beat call just we should look him up I did yeah yeah he's on tour yeah yeah PGA yeah do you think it's fair to say that he owes all of his success the time blocking is that a fair read of the of the question probably I think I think we can count that I mean what you do talk about does apply to training yeah well I think I'm popular in golf after michaelson was preaching digital minimalism at the masters a few years ago so Phil Michelson was named he talked about me and holiday right he's like new port and holidays books have been really useful to me and he was having a resurgence then so I think that seeded seeded some of my work among professional golfers that's a hard man can you imagine a harder sport because if you are a professional basketball player or baseball player like you have to be a course just freakishly athletic and like most people can't get there but if you're at let's just say what is the hardest sport once you have normalized for you have the right genetics and training that you're playing it right so not what's the hardest sport to get into but like the hardest sport once you're there to perform and if you're doing football and basketball and you it's very hard but it's not like if you lose your concentration for five seconds like the game has been lost you know like you'd like you know what I ran a bad route I'm a cornerback and I lost a step and but it's fine they didn't even throw it to him or worst case like you threw it to him in the secondary head attack I'm in they they gained some yards but if you're a golfer that's your game you lose your concentration you hit into the water you're not winning the tournament you know or if you're a basketball player it's like I missed a shot like it's it's fine you get 50 more attempts baseball somewhere in between because now it's like these at bats but you can have a bad swing anyways it just seems like the hardest sport a professional sports to actually do once you're good enough to do it and it's like the one I would least like to be in well one of the things happens with these guys are so good as I get so many birdies so the birdies can make up from this app like a bogey on a certain whole thing like a bogey but you can you see these guys melt you know yeah yeah triple bogey yeah it's right so I mean I guess they they have some leeway you know my uncle wrote a cool book about this John Paul Newport wrote a book when I was a kid called the fine green line so he was a very good golfer and he's he made a go at trying to get on the tournament and wrote a book about it so he's like doing the what do they call it Q school or the qualification tournaments because he was like a really really good golfer and the fine green line that he talks about in that book it's it's mental so it's like yeah I he's a very athletic guy he was a star quarterback at Harvard you know like athletic guy and complains like I have the physical ability to do the shots that a top golfer has I can I mean not the like a winning the tournament but like a pga player count like I could have a pga caliber round but the the biggest there's a lot of people that that's true of like very athletic people who train really hard it was the mental because you can't make a mistake it's like I know I can do it but I have the next four hours like I can't make a mistake you know and it was just so then that was what the book was about that's the fine green line who can who can put up with that mental pressure who can Tiger Woods it just be like lasers well actually when this um episode airs the master's will begin and a lot of times you're going to see the storyline of the people competing so that's where you see like you know where those errors make extreme you know difference in the thing but in terms of qualifying and earn some money and stuff like that like getting on tour like these guys just get so many birdies and sometimes that can make up for you can get the birdies can make up for the bogus but like even they hit the birdies like just consistently and like to read every green and I mean you see it in the top players they're just you know I'm going to destroy this whole and I'm going to destroy you and I'm going to make it was like woods in his prime I'm going to make this putt and like from over here like I just this is mine I own it this green is mine just like that that energy mm-hmm all right but Navi's question so here's the thing professional athletes Navi you're a professional athlete you're in it you're in an unusual situation because like a lot of what you do is training which is structured for you I mean it's effectively time blocked by time blocked by your coaching and training regimes on assuming and so in that type of job really kind of my job is I have this like really prescribed training I would say you have to basically invent what I would call a pseudo job and I would divide my life into now three things so most people's like I'm at work or I'm not at work but for you it's like I'm training I'm in my pseudo job which is like administrative stuff that needs to get done for your life to function and then I'm in leisure and I would differentiate between those three things your training is already highly structured I assume the pseudo jobs you're like technically I'm not training I'm not on the course I'm not in the gym but like I need to pay these bills and get this information to my sponsor and go buy the bank time block that because you don't want to waste too much time on the pseudo job time blocking is great for this how do I make the most out of the time I have so yes time block your pseudo your pseudo job and then have a clear distinction between that time and leisure time and don't time block to leisure time because you have to have unblock time or you're going to burn out but if you don't block the administrative kind of work stuff you need to get down for your life the function it's going to eat up all your time and it can be a source of distraction it's going to maybe even hurt you on the course so you need to try part-tight definition of your life training pseudo job and leisure time block to pseudo be much more flexible in the leisure all right that's cool professional athletes um who do we got next okay next up we have a question about full-time studying but basically that's his job is studying he does it eight hours a day and he's got a question about that hi come I'm a student I'm so good to develop an internship my job now is to basically study full-time and I'm working from home so I can decide

Chapter 5: How to structure all-day studying
how to structure my schedule. So my question is, do you think studying is considered a deep work? Because I know that the maximum deep work hours per day is around three, four, but now I kept studying around eight hours. So, do you think this is a deep work and this is possible to do? And how will you structure who times studying? You know, this is a thing that's going around now. I'm not very internet savvy, but when I talk to people who are more YouTube-y and kind of know what's going on, there's this whole culture meme out there, especially on YouTube of these super studiars that like, look, I'm going to study for 12 hours. They have like a time lapse camera on them doing it. And there's a lot of this out there. I guess it's hustle porn, which again is a whole thing I don't know much about, but suppose that on Instagram and on YouTube, there's a bunch of this like, you got an inspirational over-the-top hustle type affirmations or videos or whatever. And this is one of them. Like I study for 12 hours. People like, my God, that's awesome. Can you imagine? And I think that whole thing is nonsense. You should not be studying eight hours a day. And you're probably not doing productive work for eight hours a day. There's nothing that requires that much studying. I think it's, and I don't mean to be, accusatory here, but I think it's often like oddly performative. And I don't quite understand it. So, yeah, studying done right is deep work. It's currently demanding. Three, four hours in a day is probably a good limit. What you should do with studying is make sure that you're doing the actions that actually matter. What do you need to learn? What's the best way to actually learn it? So you want your energy to go where it actually matters. Usually for studying that's active recall. So you're trying to recall the information from scratch without looking at notes. That's what helps stick it in your head. Be wary of transfer theory. Study the actual things you need to know. The specific knowledge you need, not kind of knowledge in general. So, in the specific form, you're going to be doing it. Sample tests are always better than just reading textbooks. Like, yeah, these type of things matter. You can read like my book, How to Become a Strait A Student for more details about study tactics that really matter for multiple different types of courses. You can look at the first two years of my blog at CalNewPort.com. The first two years I really focused on advanced study tactics. So there's a lot you can do, but you should be doing two, three, maybe four hours in two sessions. That's it. And then do other stuff with the rest of your time. I mean, I really think when you see a lot of this, I study eight hours a day, I say ten hours a day. Part of its performative part of it is guilt. Like, I'm somehow not properly putting in the effort to live up to my potential if I'm not just doing this all day. This should be like a normal job. But I'm saying, put that aside. You're not going to effectively study that long. Use good techniques. A reasonable amount of time each day. And then use the rest of your time for something else that's important. That's meaningful. That's values driven. Don't be one of those hustle porn guys on YouTube. This like, look, I'm an hour 12 of a study and everyone's like, wow, how do you do it? That's not impressive. It's weird. It's a David Blaine stunt. It's not the right way to learn things. All right. So hopefully that's a relief for this person asking the question and not like an accusation. But I've seen these things. It's a whole thing. Like, it's time-lapse videos that people just studying like ridiculous hours. And people, I guess it's supposed to be impressive or something like that. The video's getting a lot of use. Yeah, maybe we should do it. Yeah, we should do. I would be, I can't see, look, I'm lazy. That's why I do all this like focus and be organized. Because I can't just like grind it out or whatever. So it'd be a pretty, pretty boring. Well, you have 17 jobs. I don't think you're lazy, but you just have a lot of things. I just, I'm not a good grinder. Yeah. All right. What do we got here? Next question. The next question is about embracing boredom. Howdy, Cal. Erica here. I've been listening to some of your older episodes again. And you, we talked about boredom at times.

Chapter 6: Handling boredom
I'm curious how you are bored. You read a phone book, watch clouds in the sky, and I'm kidding. But I am curious about what you do to be bored, so that way you can embrace the boredom as opposed to feel like you want to climb up walls and escape. Love your work. Thanks a lot. Take care. Bye. I'm glad she jokes, but have you heard of these podcasts, Jesse, where it's people reading the phone book? No, they're popular. They're popular. So my wife and I were listening to an MPR thing that was talking about these podcasts. Like this is a real thing. You can probably find one if you search. Like they, they, it'll read a read from a phone book for like a couple hours. It was like a nice voice, the good mic. The MPR was trying to argue this long complicated argument about like over stimulation and blah, blah, blah. And no, it's people trying to fall asleep. So some people like to hear just, you know, a voice, just kind of reading. There's no actual, the content triggers nothing in your brain, but you're just kind of like hearing it. And for some people find it relaxing. So there's like a lot of these podcasts. I mean, some of it might be ASMR too, but there's a lot of these podcasts and it's really just people reading. Which by the way would be much easier for us to produce. All this nonsense. I mean, I still have you in the studio. So we just cut to you. I just, I would just be reading names. Like I could sell my 200K a month. Exactly. I'd be like Erica. Alex. Donald. Jesse, what do you think? You'd be like, good names. Good names. Then I would just go back and keep reading names. That would be easier. But what was the question? How do I embrace boredom? Okay. So here's the thing about boredom. I'm not a boredom booster. So I argue in deep work embrace boredom. But I don't argue like, let's go seek out staring at the wall. And that like we're going to get inside or whatever. As Erica was hinting at here, the reason why I think you should become comfortable and familiar with boredom is that. Otherwise, your mind is going to demand stimuli. And when you're doing something like deep work, which is the void of a lot of diverse stimuli, just doing the same thing. It'll be comfortable with it. And if you're not, if you always look at your phone when you're bored, your mind won't tolerate the lack of stimuli and doing something like deep work. But here's the thing. My answer is hidden in like my solution is hidden in that answer. Like the reason why I say embrace boredom is so that when you're doing deep work, which is boring, you won't feel that urge look at something else. So that means the type of quote unquote boredom I seek is actually just doing monofocus things that can be of value and have interest, but just aren't super stimuli don't have a lot of stimuli, right? So just reading for a long time. It can be really interesting, but then there's also parts of your mind like, can we look at something else? Can we look at our phone and you're like, you don't. You know, so reading can do it. Walking is another big one for me. Don't put on the headphones when I do the walk. Now, I'm not again, I'm not trying to induce boredom. I'm not meditating. I'm not staring at the sidewalk. I'm thinking about things. I'm reflecting. I'm trying to have ideas. But I'm avoiding the really highly super palatable digital distractions going into a store. I'm just going to the store and see what's going on. So for me, this is how I'm defining boredom is absence of highly palatable digital distraction. So it doesn't mean you have to be doing nothing. To me, it just means you have to be doing something that you could have done 25 years ago. It's like you're trying to simulate whatever 1995, where I'm not reading from the phone book, but I can't look at my phone while I'm waiting in line. You know, or I'm on a walk, I don't know my walk man. And so that's what I'd recommend for everyone is that on a regular basis, you want to do things where you not, you have no highly stimulating digital distractions, even though you feel the urge for them. I can't just take this out. Even watching TV can accomplish this. I'm watching TV and my instinct is kind of look at my phone at the same time. I'm not getting enough stimuli and you don't. So, you know, again, I'm not staring at clouds. I'm not reading a phone book. I can watch TV. But by removing highly palatable digital distractions from many different points of your life, you get used to being in situations where you don't have access to those highly palatable digital distractions. So, maybe I need a different word instead of boredom, it's like stimuli freedom or 1995 mode. It's getting away from that and being okay with getting away from that, where that is for listeners, me holding up a fake phone. That is the key. All right, let me talk for a second here about the key to understanding books, which is our sponsor, Blinkist. So, Blinkist is a long time friend of the show. It's a subscription service in which you get access to 10 to 15 minute summaries of thousands of best-selling nonfiction books. You can read the summaries or you can listen to them. It is the best way to quickly assess a book and say, what's this about? What are the ideas? Do I need to actually buy and read this or do I have enough to kind of know how this works? Do I have to kind of know how this fits into the cultural conversation? Blinkist is the tool to do it. It's my sort of right-hand man, my extra secret power for quickly navigating the world of books and figuring out what I read and what I don't need to read, making sure that I'm up on the cultural conversation without having to try to read 50 books just to know everything that's happening. So, if you are a reader and you should be, Blinkist needs to be in your bag of tools. So, right now Blinkist has a special offer just for our audience. If you go to Blinkist.com slash deep to start your free seven-day trial, you'll get 25% off a Blinkist Premium Membership. That's Blinkist spelled B-L-I-N-K-I-S-T. Blinkist.com slash deep to get 25% off a seven-day free trial. That's Blinkist.com slash deep. I also want to talk about athletic greens. So, we worry like, are we getting the right nutrients? Do I have the right men roles? Am I getting enough vitamin whatever? I mean, these are things we worry about, especially as we get older. I worry about this a little bit, but I'm still in my 30s. Jesse is in his 40s, so this is all he thinks about because his body is falling apart on him. How are you going to get the right things you need? Well, as I've always said, you have two choices and only two choices. Number one, you can go into a GMC and get lost among all of those shelves of all this random stuff, where you have a 50% chance that a roided up body builder will beat you mercilessly for walking into the store. That happens 50% of the time, or you can do athletic greens. You have to choose. Let me tell you why I think you should choose athletic greens. In addition to you not getting beaten mercilessly by a steroid body builder, it is the top in my opinion, the top supplement source on the market, because what they do is say, we will figure out for you what you need, but also where they've very best sources of these different things are, we will put it together in just one product, this powder. And all we do is this powder. We're always improving it. They have different versions. They upgrade it every year. Can we get a better mineral? Can we get a better adaptogen? And all you have to worry about as the consumer is one scoop once a day, put it in water in the morning, drink it, you're done. They obsess about getting the right ingredients in here. They obsess about getting the right form that's going to be the most effective so that you don't have to. You don't have to go into the GMC. You don't have to get punched by a body builder. You just take the athletic greens powder every morning, and you can trust it's done. So I take athletic greens. Jesse will attest to this. I have told him about it. I have sold them on it. I take it each morning so I don't have to worry about anything else. And I recommend you do too. So right now it's time to reclaim your health and arm your immune system with convenient daily nutrition, especially now that we're in flu and cold season. It's just one scoop in a cup of water every day. That's it. No need for a million different pills and supplements to look out for your health. To make it easy, the athletic greens is going to give you free. A one year supply of immune supporting vitamin D and five free travel packs with your first purchase. All you have to do is visit athletic greens dot com slash deep. Again, that is athletic greens dot com slash deep to take ownership over your health. All right, Jesse. I think we have time. Ooh, all right. We have time for one more. So the viewing audience doesn't know is I'm. Running a big search committee meeting. Immunately. And so we're sort of podcasting under the wire here. This is one of my 17 jobs is running the faculty search committee. So we got a switch from athletic greens to a question to faculty recruiting. This is why I have two cups of coffee. So let's fit in one more, Jesse. We can fit in one more. All right. Sounds good. And this is a fitting one. We got a question about deep work in YouTube. Hi, I'm Daniel high school student from Toronto. My question for you was, how do I ensure I'm doing deep work when I need to be connected to a distracting source like the Internet? I'm trying to learn web development. So each human.

Chapter 7: Deep Work vs. YouTube
LCSS and some JavaScript. And the best way I found to do so, and from talking to other people, the best way to do so is through YouTube and the internet, which is also incredibly distracting source that you've mentioned as a killer of deep work. So I'd love to hear your thoughts on how I can recognize those two things. Thanks. Well, Daniel, first of all, don't trust anyone who puts content on YouTube. Because I can't. Someone who, it's all garbage, and anything that's on YouTube, I would not trust if I was you. We'll hold on, Justy's handing me a memo here at We're on YouTube, oh. No. But you know what, Justy, but we're not very popular on YouTube. So I think that means that we are not being distracting. So we can keep the YouTube channel alive. Yeah, YouTube channel alive. Yeah, Daniel, you need to watch our channel and you need to ring that bell and smash the subscribe button. And once we start giving away brief cases for the money to our guests to try to get people to watch YouTube. Oh, man. Okay, Daniel, it's a good question. So I hear this a lot, this general, this general point a lot, especially from high school students, which is like, I have to use, there's something I need from the internet that's part of this bigger work I'm doing. How could I possibly not just like be endlessly distracted on the internet? And I think you can separate the two things. You can separate the two things. So you're learning how you're learning how to code. Okay. And you're getting information from the internet. Makes sense. A lot of good information on there. You can Google commands that like you don't understand. You can watch like a YouTube tutorial. Okay. And you're saying the problem is, when you look for those other things on the internet, you also end up doing other types of distracting things. Like you go to look up at a YouTube video about CSS. And you see like recommended a Cal Newport video where I'm giving briefcases of money to professional golfers and like, there you go. You have to click on that and you have to watch that. My advice is don't click on the other things. You know, I mean, I think there's this helplessness a little bit of, look, if I'm on the internet and I see things that are appealing like I have to click on it. And I don't think we're so helpless. I mean, at least if we're talking about very specific context, you're like, this is a specific thing I'm doing. I'm trying to learn how to code and I'm spending the next hour working on it. Just say I'm not going to look at non-coding related things even if I see a link. Now, I know in general, it's very difficult if I say, I'm just going to try not to use the internet. Like, come on, you have all this different times your life, your board, your watching TV, like you're, fine, that's very difficult. In the specific context of I am doing this activity, I don't think that's a hard rule to follow because it's very clear and it makes sense. Like, I'm trying to learn something right now. I'm not going to, I'm not going to go on the internet, right? Like, I think just being clear and tough will be about that might be all you need. If you're serious about learning how to code, don't click video recommendations. And yeah, you can do plugins and do a distraction-free tube plugin that gets rid of the recommendations when you're on YouTube. I can tell you, treat YouTube like a library, not a television channel. So you search for the specific things you need. You don't surf serendipitously to see what's interesting. I can tell you all those rules, I can talk about putting on blockers on your internet that you can configure so you can't go to other types of things. But I think it's just simpler to say, when you're programming, don't click on anything else. You know, have a little, and that act of individual discipline, I think is actually going to empower you. Because you're like, you know what? I don't have to click on this nonsense when I don't want to. And I'm learning something because it's important to me and I see these links and I don't click on it. I have power over that. I mean, I think feeling that power, feeling that efficacy. I'm in charge of what I look at. If this algorithm doesn't run me, these links don't run me. I'm constructing my world is a very important thing to have. And this might be a place as a high school student. So you're new to this to say, yeah, I might be a teenager. You know, I'm not an old man like Jesse. I'm much closer to like a young in his 30s type personality like Cal. But so you're young man. This is the time to say, I'm an adult. I'm about to become an adult. I can use the internet without losing control. And I know a lot of adults can't do that, but I think you can, Daniel. So that's my tough love thing. Just don't click. Just don't do it. See the recommendations. Don't click. It's a simple rule. And I'm not saying your whole life, but when you're doing programming, just do programming block off that time. Look up what you need to look up. Don't follow links. You're going to come out on the other side of that invigorated. Like, oh, I guess I am kind of in control of this. And that could snowball to more and more feeling of efficacy, more and more discipline with digital distraction. So it actually could be the entry point, the entry point to a much better relationship to these technologies. So what we'll skip all of the plugins will skip all of the blockers will skip all of the rhetoric and just say, don't buy into that narrative of helplessness. That you have to follow distractions because you're young and young people are out of control on the internet and they can't help themselves. And they live on YouTube. You can do what you want to do. And I think what you're doing is cool. Learn hard school, learn hard skills, build cool things, connect to people who are interesting, expose yourself to ideas, all the interesting stuff to make a good life good at your age. Do those things. And you can you can leave the going down YouTube rabbit holes for time when you have nothing else to do. All right. Well, I think that's all the time we have. I have to go run a meeting. I think you're everyone who sent in their listener calls. If you like what you heard, you'll like what you see on our YouTube channel. If you'll be or saying that after just telling Daniel not to click on YouTube link. So if you go to our YouTube channel at youtube.com slash CalMuPortMedia, ignore the recommendations, treat it like a library. Go there just because you're you specifically are coming to listen to some cow, not because you are web surfing. If you like what you heard, you'll also like what you read at my newsletter. Sign up at calnewport.com. We'll be back next week on Monday with our next episode of the deep questions podcast and until then as always stay deep.